Okay, we can continue. The Southern Education
Board was a forerunner of many regional boards
which made provisions for students in states that
had no veterinary school to attend veterinary
school in nearby states. For example, the
Southern School took care of Most of the students
in the South, they could either go to Georgia,
Alabama, or Texas, depending on which was the
nearest. The Western schools included Colorado
and Washington and so forth. The Northern schools
mostly were in, I mean, the North Central schools
primarily went to Iowa
Northeastern schools to Cornell.
Even this didn't take care of the students, so many
states made provision for veterinary schools
their own. For example, Minnesota,
Virginia, Louisiana, Mississippi, California,
Oh, I don't know. I can't call them all, but all
those... California Davis? Yes. All those fuels
came in after World War II.
So the curriculum was pretty well standardized,
and you had to have so many hours, you can get that in
the catalog. But that's pretty well
standardized, regardless of what fuel you go to in
the United States. There may be a little
variation, for example, in the number of hours
traded, or due to the Location that may be more
emphasis like we have more emphasis on Ferris dog
in Texas than they do on in Minnesota, for example,
while they have Maybe One on the disease of
fur-bearing animals, which it's a little
consequence here. Yes, but all in all the
curriculum was first established by the National
Defense Act of 1920 and when it set out the
requirements for a veterinarian that was
entitled to or competent to be employed by the
federal government. And during the Depression
years, this was particularly important because
many veterinarians left their practice to seek
government work in order to make ends meet.
Now, I have a question concerning the increasing
number of pre-professional college work. In
1975, or after the Second World War, you had to have
basically two hours or two years of
pre-professional. And in 1975 at Texas A&M, it was
increased to 66 hours. Today, do you need a BS
degree officially to gain entrance into Texas
A&M? I don't know. okay I retired 10 years ago yeah
11 years ago I really don't know and the basic and
could you and the basic reason as I understand for
an increase in in the number of hours before you get
into vet school is to make better vet students and
because the competition was too high are those the
two reasons well and and to get everything
possible out of the veterinary college proper
that could be taught in other places. In other
words, like English, or physics, or entomology,
or chemistry, or biological chemistry. There's
many things like that that can be better taught in
their own, by their own factors than by a
veterinarian. DAVID BURRAGE. Sure, absolutely.
OK, now another thing that you mentioned that
stimulated me was that before World War II and even
before the 1960s, as a matter of fact, more out of
state were applying to Texas A&M. And we briefly
talked about this last time. I was wondering what
effect it had, what effect these out of state
students had on Texas A&M. well of course it had it
had two effects first it it crowded out many
potential texas students
and the second it just overburdened the
facilities right but with the regional boards
like for example southern board uh
let nine or 12 Louisiana students come in. Those
were picked students, picked by Louisiana, not by
Texas A&M, but sent over under the covering of the
National Education Board, or Southern Regional,
I believe they called it. But since they were
picked students, they were no dummies. Yeah, they
were top notch. They were top notch, and that
raised the IQ quite a bit. and it raised the
competition. Sure, for Texans too. Sure, because
there were nine places that, or 12 places that were
set aside for Louisiana, there were 12 places
Texas couldn't get, and then when they let the
girls in, that really put the big pot in the little
one, because those girls were and are top
students, and so Competition is, again, keen. So
it really comes down to the fact when you take the
top number of students, when you take in 128 and you
have 500 applications, you have a pretty
competitive deal. In fact, it's even more
competitive than it is to get into medical school,
quite a bit. Now the first woman was admitted as a
student here in 1963 and now they comprise about
one-third of the student body and I was wondering
if there was any resistance from the faculty
members when the first women came? They might have
been a little temporary resistance but there's
none now. In fact the girls are, the women I should
say, are university good students and we've
progressed sufficiently far now that we have
several women faculty members. I noticed that.
Particularly in anatomy and bacteriology and
virology and
various disciplines that don't really cause them
to be cowboys. Right. Now do you know how it came
about that women were first admitted? Well, yes.
Could you explain? Well, I can't explain but I can
tell you Mr. Rudder decided they were going to come
in and they did.
In other words, it was... It was the handwriting on
the wall. It's like the CRA and women's rights and
everything. regardless of what you say, you
couldn't run Texas A&M without federal money. And
women are citizens, and the daughters and even the
wives of some of the veterinarians wanted to take
veterinary medicine. If they were qualified,
why, what could you do? And so it was just, it was
just a part of the coming of age or the realization
that a woman is a citizen. For example, Dr.
Dorothea Robin out here at College Station, her
husband was a professor, well actually he was an
instructor then, in the Department of Pathology.
She was graduating University of Texas in
biology, so she applied, she got her degree, Since
then, there have been quite a few male
veterinarians, married women veterinarians,
who set up a joint practice.
And quite a few of those role matches started in the
veterinary school. I would think so. And to
present time, I think, I'm not, you'll have to
check with Dr. Shelton or Dr. Bay on this, but I
think there's about 25% of the total enrollment in
the school of veterinary medicine are women.
Right today, there's about one-third. Is that
right? Well, anyway, they're almost unbearably
good students and they rarely see one drop out
because it's scholastic.
In other words, it was basically Mr. Rutter's
decision that brought this about. There wasn't
any input from the doctors of veterinary medicine
who were teaching? Well, who makes those
decisions? I don't know. I was just like you. I just
worked there. Right, right. I know, I know. All I
know, it came in during Mr. Rudder's regime, and
most of the other schools in the United States
didn't have the male-only image of Texas A&M, so we
were the last to get in line. In fact, there was a
girl who graduated a year ahead of me at Kansas
State, 1932 and another graduated a year
following me in 1934 even though they were not in my
class of 33. I see.
But who did I don't know all I know what happened
during Mr. Rudder's regime. Okay fine uh now did
this did the admittance of women as students
produce any changes in the curriculum?
No, those girls do just everything that a man does
as far as...
Mm-hmm. Did it produce any changes in student
activities? Was there a woman's organization of
veterinarians? There is a national organization
of women veterinarians, but locally I don't know.
Okay,
okay. Now there's still something that interests
me and I know last time we talked about this and last
time you weren't quite sure why this was but you
know in 1962 180 students applied for vet school
and today there's over 600 students. That is the
mystery. I was talking to my local physician about
that the other day. He had a relative that had a
wanted to be a veterinarian. And he never got in,
although he applied two or three times. But he
remarked, and he used a word, he said, hell, it's
harder to get in veterinary school than it is in
medical school. I said, yes, or law school either.
But why, I don't know. Why all of a sudden everybody
in the United States decided they wanted to be a
veterinarian, I don't know. No.
You'll have to ask some economist or whatnot, but I
really don't know. Now, back in 1957 and 1958, in
those years, there were approximately 240
students total in vet school. And now it's over
400. So I was wondering what impact that increase
in students had. Well, the impact was that we were
always using
a dollar short and a day late. We were trying to,
running all the time to stay in the same place.
But it meant that more instructors had to be hired
and more physical facility had to be obtained. And
it's primarily why there's new clinical facility
being built out on the highway now. But the demand
has to be there before you can sell it to the power to
be to get money for teachers
and buildings and equipment. Because it comes as a
surprise to a lot of people It's almost expensive
to educate a veterinarian as an individual
physician. Microscopes cost the same, x-ray
machines cost the same. Sure.
Bacteriology and virology techniques are the
same.
So we were just running like hell trying to save
them. Trying to keep up with it, OK. Now, because
there were more students, did that mean that there
were new programs that were developed? No, it
meant that,
come back to the original statement, why were
there more students? I don't know. The curriculum
had been pretty well standardized. Oh,
occasionally they put in one class or dropped out
one class, but The curriculum's been pretty well
standardized for the last 20 years. Okay. With the
exception, of course, of moving things out of the
veterinary curriculum into the pre-veterinary
curriculum to make room for more clinical
science. Okay. Now, do you think with the hiring of
new instructors, do you think the quality of
instruction change in any way? Oh, if anything,
it's gone better because these new instructors,
most of them are graduates from top graduates from
schools that had just as much pressure as we do.
Okay, so you think that the quality of instruction
probably improved. Oh, yeah. Okay. Now, I was
wondering about something else as far as
instruction. Well, there's another thing I'd
like to emphasize. All the instructors in the
School of Veterinary Medicine are not
veterinarians. For example, in bacteriology and
virology and things like that, there are many
PhDs. Right, right. Well, why don't we stay on that
topic for a minute? I was going to ask you about
that. We didn't, at Texas A&M, we didn't grant a
master's degree and doctor's degree for some
years. As a matter of fact, we didn't grant our
first PhD until 1955 at Texas A&M. That's right.
Look how the graduate school has grown. Mm-hmm,
mm-hmm. I was wondering what was the stimulus?
What were the reasons for now expanding your
program from just doctors of veterinarian
medicine now to PhD in veterinarian pathology or
something? Well, I think it's primarily the
demand for research and for teaching purposes.
Okay. Because the DVM and the research
laboratory, for example, National Institute of
Health or whatnot, Needs the original, needs the
additional specialization in order to hold the
job.
Research is a big deal when everything causes
cancer that you eat. And you have to have a hundred
rats on something for a hundred days. Somebody has
to examine those rats to tell whether they're
cancerous or not. So you have to have a qualified
pathologist. or water quality, you have to have a
qualified bacteriologist or biologist to
isolate, for example, infectious hepatitis from
the oysters that they drag up out of New Orleans.
And then we're going into things like marine
biology and these fish farms where people are
growing catfish in a two-acre pond on their own
land. And then, of course, there's always the fact
we've had the good years when everybody had a dog
and most people have a horse. You have a boat, and if
you're really uptown, well, you have a boat and you
put your horse in it and go down the highway with a
trailer so everybody knows you're well off.
But like the recent outbreak, rabies care in
Houston and to a lesser extent here in Bryan. You
have to have skilled people with the actual basic
knowledge of how to handle things like that. I have
another question concerning people with
doctorates and advanced degrees coming to Texas
A&M. In the history department some years ago
there was a tendency that whenever you needed a new
professor you just called up the University of
Texas and They sent over a couple of their PhD
candidates and you hired one and consequently we
have a number of people on our staff that were hired
before 1970 that were PhDs from Texas. Does the vet
school or did the vet school favor a certain
institution? No. Well, let me put it this way. In
the early days, Ohio State probably got the nod
because of Dr. Francis. But since 19, oh, I'd say
1920, 25, they take the best man they can get. For
example, we've had several people from the
University of Iowa, from the University of
California, I mean, Colorado, quite a few from
Cornell,
some from Georgia. For example, a man who took my
place at the university when I retired, Dr. Bell.
University of Georgia graduate. And then, like,
since all the new schools come in, we have a lot more
varieties to select from. We have people here from
Purdue and from Missouri and from California, all
of which were, those schools didn't exist back
there. They actually only had about six or eight
schools to pick from prior to 1925. There's
another thing I was interested in with young
instructors and that is the basis for tenure in the
School of Veterinary Medicine. I can't tell you
that because I really don't know. I know that
professors usually get tenure or they don't, they
wouldn't give a professorship but the others I
don't know the number of years you have to be or No,
I'm not talking about recently. I'm talking about
when you started teaching, for example. Were you
on a tenure system in the 30s and the 40s or exactly?
Well, actually, I was in the Experiment Station
the first nine years and there wasn't a tenure.
Right, you were just a staff member. But when you
switched and when new people in the 1940s and 50s
came in exclusively to teach, were they on some
sort of a tenure system? Not unless they were
assistant professor or higher. And most of the
time, I think it broke off with the associate
professor. But I really don't know that. You'll
have to ask somebody better qualified. That comes
under academic rules and regulations.
While we're talking about the fact that more PhDs
were issued, I've noticed that the deans and the
administrators invariably in the more recent
years have held held the PhD. Has that affected,
uh, quality of education? Well, I think that's
simply, uh, what you say, window
dressing. That's not the right word, but it's
pretty hard to impress a PhD unless you have one
also. Mm-hmm, mm-hmm. Or judge his
qualifications. Mm-hmm, mm-hmm. But it's all
come back to the fact that
Most of those fellows who were dean now weren't
counting on being dean when they got to Ph.D. They
were figuring they were going into research or
teaching or something similar. Industrial
research has a lot of those names. People who put
out that Merck manual have got a lot of names.
Mischart and Dohm and those kind of people. I mean,
Merck, Sharp, and Dohm. Do these advanced degrees
have any connection with an increasing amount of
specialization in veterinary medicine? Is
veterinary medicine becoming more specialized
like so many other endeavors? In fact, we have
subdivisions in the AVMA. We have the Society of
Equine Practitioners, Association of Bovine
Practitioners, Association of Swine
Practitioners.
Association of Industrial Veterinarians. Oh,
you can go on, you can subdivide it down to, almost
divide it to MDs, except we don't have any
pediatrics yet, or gynecologists.
Now there's something else I was interested in,
and that is the Southwestern Veterinarian, the
journal. Well... Do you know anything about that?
I do. I was one of the instigators on starting it.
Good. Tell me about your role, your participation
in that. Well, the students, some of these better
students that we talked about earlier, felt that
we should have a medium by which they could write
things or learn how to present research, either
profound or less so, and some of the practitioners
in the state were, most of whom were recent
graduates, also wanted to help us. At that time,
the Texas Veterinary Medical General, which is
the official organ of the state thing, was just
really a news sheet. It wasn't a general in the
sense of word, and
was also on the editorial board of that and we
decided that we would keep the official
publication simply that not try to make it a
general in the true sense of words like for example
the general the avma or what so forth first because
of cost come out of practitioners pocket second if
we had to pay for articles and things and whatnot,
the printing and so forth. The description would
be so high, which now goes as part of their dues,
that it would have a negative effect. So they were
wholeheartedly behind the Southwestern Bandai.
And the first boy we had as editor, his name was Carl
Wallace, I believe, fell to the cave.
proved quite
apt, and we got off to a good start. And it was
primarily designed as a magazine for practicing
veterinary. Instead of having some article there
on the effect of some rare drug on monkeys, or how to
extract the tooth from an Indian elephant. It was
down-to-earth, everyday practice problems. And
it succeeded beyond our expectations. And then,
of course, the... In what way? In acceptance by the
profession. And then inflation caught us.
There was one else. And we had a little trouble
financially.
When was this? Well, the last few years. The last
few years, OK. Because the price of paper went up.
Sure. Price of printing went up. And so the price in
general had to go up. And there's a little consumer
resistance, like everything else. You don't need
as much butter for $2 a pound if you do it.
twenty-five cents, but so far it weathered the
storm.
But it was primarily started by the students, and
the former graduates of this school have been most
faithful in helping keep it up. Now what was your
role? More advisory? Advisory. It was a student
publication. Yeah, right.
They were, I forget, three or five faculty members
that served on the advisory committee together
with the director of student publications.
Now that we're talking about your duties and
functions, from 1949 until 1967, you were on the
library committee. 15 years. Could you tell me
about that? Yes.
It started with our move across, no it didn't, it
started while we were still on the main campus. Dr.
Ralph Dunn was dean then and we had a spare room in
the veterinary hospital.
Dr. Marksteller had a few issues of his blood horse
Gentile journals and various trade journals. The
boys used it primarily as a place to go in and smoke a
cigarette and
spend spare time between classes. So Dr. Dunn came
up with the idea, why don't we start a library? And
in order for it to be viable and functional, to not
be in competition with Cushing Memorial, but be a
part of it. So he talked to, I forget who the
librarian was over there at that time. We were in
charge of the main library. But it was agreeable.
And
we had asked each department to contribute books
that time each department bought their own books,
you see. Where'd they keep them? They kept them in
their own individual offices. See, there wasn't
any central library. In other words, in the clinic
would be books on clinical medicine, and the
pathology department would be pathology, and so
forth. So they agreed, and it just grew, it just
started to grow. our first,
I can't think of her name, anyway, we got a
professionally trained librarian.
What was, pardon me, turn it off. June, what was,
anyway, we obtained a professional medical
librarian, and one who was familiar
technical words and technical phrases and she got
it off to a real good start and she was offered a
better job in Houston or someplace and we brought
in a Mrs. Kirksey, K-I-R-K-S-E.